Let’s talk about tilt.

We tackled the subject briefly when we discussed opponent psychology, but now we will take the internal perspective. We will explore how tilt manifests, how to conceptualize it, the various forms it takes, and how to abate it.

We’ll begin with some definitions. Tilt is, simply, when your emotions negatively affect your normal gameplay. Tilt is primarily caused by five things: losing a pot, failing a play, feeling insulted or disrespected, having an atrophied mental state (such as by being tired, hungry, or hung over), or being affected by concurrent life events (such as losing a job, having a fight with your significant other, etc.).

I also stated before that there are two major manifestations of tilt—hot tilt and cold tilt. Hot tilt is the aggressive, angry, try-to-win-it-all-back-right-now type of tilt, which can be emblemized by the blind all-in preflop shove. Cold tilt is more of the resigned, tired, just-let-me-get-aces-one-time type of tilt, which is emblemized by the player who’s been playing for twelve hours straight and is folding to all of your 3-bets. For more discussion on hot tilt vs. cold tilt, see Chapter 3. 

We discussed before the “pot of boiling water” metaphor for tilt. Your tilt level is like a pot filled with warm water. As bad (tilting) things happen to you, they each deliver a unit of heat to the pot of water. For a while, the heat won’t affect you, and your internal water will remain stable and calm. But after a certain point—at your boiling point (i.e., your tilt threshold), the water will start to simmer, and as more heat is added, boil more and more violently. This is the nature of tilt.

But like with a pot of water, once you turn off the heat (i.e., step away from the poker game), this does not mean that your tiltedness diminishes to zero. The pot of water will retain some of the heat, which we call accumulated tilt. It is essentially the residual tilt from a downswing, or lots of bad beats, or whatever. Thus, the next time the heat is turned on, it is easier to bring one’s pot to a boil. Accumulated tilt can be naturally resolved by simply letting the pot cool down for a while (i.e., taking a break), but there are also other methods for attacking accumulated tilt, which will be discussed in the subsequent section on downswings.

This serves as an adequate definition of tilt. But this leaves the question—what is going on beneath the surface? Why does tilt happen at all? How does it work?

Let’s start at the level of the brain. If tilt is when our emotions negatively affect our normal gameplay, then we can restate this as our limbic system (part of the unconscious mind, which regulates emotional responses) inhibiting our conscious mind (which is supposed to be regulating our unconscious poker game with theory). When a player goes on monkey tilt, he undergoes a flight or fight response—due to various neurochemical reactions, his unconscious mind, with its impulses, instincts, and reactivity, takes control over his poker decisions. The conscious mind is essentially overridden (and partially shut down to conserve energy).

Recall the distinction we made before between conscious competence and unconscious competence. Essentially what happens when one is tilting is that the conscious mind is getting pushed out of the picture, and therefore the unconscious mind is in full control. The result is that when you tilt, you are performing your unconscious competency, without the self-checking conscious mind looking over your shoulder. In other words, what you do when you tilt is equivalent to your unconsciously mastered game.

Have you ever wondered why people behave differently when they tilt?

Let’s take two players of equivalent skill level, who play the same stakes, but tilt very differently. And let’s say that they both go on monkey tilt (and their level of tiltedness is equivalent). The first player might start 3-betting more aggressively and 4-bet calling off with medium pairs, making more desperate hero calls, all of which he normally doesn’t do. But the second player, despite being of the same skill level—when he goes on tilt, he open shoves ace-rag preflop into four players, and then checkraises a flop with a gutshot, fires turn, and overbet-shoves-river when he misses. He seems much crazier when he tilts.

Clearly, these two players tilt very differently. A naïve interpretation might be that “oh, player 2 is just a monkey.” But let’s be more precise. If we take tilt as an indicator of your unconscious game, what this implies is that when player 1 takes off all of his conscious mental checks, all that he has unconsciously trained himself to be able to do is to elevate his 3-betting frequency, 4-bet/call more, etc. Player 1, in a profound sense, cannot open shove A4o preflop like player 2 can. His unconscious mind won’t let him. He doesn’t even perceive it as a possibility, or a decision to ever make. In other words, player 2 is not “more tilted” than player 1 in order to make “tiltier” plays—it is simply an indication that player 2’s unconscious mind is less restricting of the available poker space. Player 2’s unconscious mind sees open shoving A4o preflop as a possible play, where Player 1’s mind does not.

In a sense, when you tilt, your mental shackles start going off, one by one. Your most unrestricted conception of what is possible in poker begins to come out. But most people, myself included, have too much mental inhibition to ever open shove a hand, no matter how tilted they are. I have monkey tilted many times in my career, but I have never considered open shoving a hand preflop—I have never even been close. This is not because I have not “tilted as bad” as someone else, but simply that my completely unfettered unconscious mind could not even consider doing such a thing—but it nevertheless did all that it was capable of doing. With tilt, some play looser, some 3-bet more, and some make hero shoves. But, at its essence, your unconscious mind will only do things that it believes might work. Chances are, if somebody is open shoving preflop, he unconsciously believes that he might end up winning (and it is likely that if this behavior has not been extinguished, it has been rewarded at some point in the past, which is why his unconscious mind continues to do it)—or, alternatively, if someone is open shoving hands preflop, it is possible that what he actually wants to do is lose (we will discuss the desire to lose and reset your narrative in the subsequent section).

Recall the perspective we’ve been discussing earlier with regards to emotion. Emotional responses always arise for a reason; they are vestiges of the emotional substructure beneath them. To dismiss them as merely random blips is to simply throw away information. There is no such thing as “just tilt.” There is always some underlying value, desire, or belief to which tilt is merely the response. If you want to correct your tilt, you must first understand the underlying emotional structure and incentives.

Here, then, we can see one of the problems for the term “tilt” as it’s commonly used. We have defined tilt as “emotions negatively affecting our gameplay”—but if you think about it, this definition is enormous. We already know that “emotion” runs a large gamut. To compress all of the ways that emotion can affect us into one word, “tilt,” is problematic—two players can both say that they have tilt problems, and yet have almost nothing in common in terms of their particular issues, triggers, or solutions. One player may tilt because he feels like he never gets to win a flip, and the other may tilt because he’s tired, and has been playing too long, and his mother-in-law has been yelling at him. So if you tell me “I lost money because of tilt today,” the inexactness of that word fails to capture nuanced information about why and in what way you tilted.

Poker players are great at discussing strategic mistakes that made them lose—“I was 3-betting too much and trying to win too many pots,” or “I kept calling all his river shoves when he was playing pretty nitty,” but never will you hear a poker player tell someone else “I was tilting because I felt like I deserved to win, so I decided to try to force winning and increase variance by moving up.”

Perhaps this is an understandable development—our hyper-masculine poker culture is discouraging of emotion and vulnerability. This has the effect of stifling emotional self-awareness. Interestingly, poker strategy has evolved tremendously in the last five years, as a result of open, rigorous discourse and exchange of ideas—but emotional skills have not really followed alongside it. This is due in no small part to the implicit taboo of talking openly and vulnerably about one’s own tilt. Though we might be fine admitting to strategic mistakes, we are more likely to laugh off our tilt mistakes—among friends, to joke about our degeneracy, only to sulk over our failings in private.

Emotional skills are developed no differently than strategic skills. And in order to develop them, it takes time, discipline, and most importantly, the acuity to see oneself and one’s mistakes honestly.

So we’ve established that there are many different kinds of tilt, and that it is problematic to group them all under one umbrella. Jared Tendler, in The Mental Game of Poker lists what he thinks are the six main types of tilt: injustice tilt, hate-losing tilt, mistake tilt, entitlement tilt, revenge tilt, and desperation tilt. These are convenient categories, but ultimately, tilt spans a spectrum, and there can be no generalized solution to tilt that will apply to everyone, since everyone has their own specific emotional profile, beliefs, and values.

Thus, there is no generalized answer to the question—“why do people tilt at all?” If we take the perspective that our behaviors arise for good reasons, then what problem in our emotional substructure does tilt solve? You could talk about the conditioning of correct behaviors with their rewards, you could talk about trying to secure positive self-perceptions and egotistical homeostasis, you could talk about rebelling against the structure of injustice in poker, you could talk about trying to attack your opponents to restore your sense of superiority—there are many reasons why people tilt, but we each tilt for our reasons, and in our own ways. There is no single answer that pertains to everyone, and so we must each seek to understand how we ourselves are emotionally constituted.

So let’s say you’re already in a session, and you realize that you’ve begun tilting—what can you do to allay your tilt? Well, as long as I have you here: quit. But, of course, you’re tilting, so perhaps that’s a futile suggestion. The first of the effective techniques for alleviating tilt is breath control. There are literally hundreds of different breath control techniques—which one in particular you choose is unimportant. If you are not familiar with any, I would recommend simply this—when you realize you are on tilt, lean back in your chair to open up your diaphragm and support your lower back. Relax your body as much as you can. Then, close your eyes, and take ten deep, long breaths. As you are taking these breaths, try to internally scan your body. Try to think, “Hmm… let’s look at what sensations I’m feeling. Let’s see what this tilt feels like. Where do I feel it? What does it feel like in my body?” As you are taking these long breaths, try to look objectively at what sensations you’re experiencing internally. The very act of calm examination will defang many of the emotions and sensations. If this moment of mental distance allows you to convince yourself to quit, or even if you sit back in and continue to play, you will feel better, more centered, calm, and self-aware if you engage in this exercise.

There are a number of other things that can help with tilt problems—there are mantras you can recite to yourself, pre-session rituals, taking breaks, visualizing, and so on. The list is endless, and like I said, there is no special ritual that is going to work for everyone.

But ultimately, for most people, tilt is a very difficult issue to correct on one’s own. It’s not impossible, by any means, and most players will naturally improve at it over time—but having seen many, many players who wanted to improve on their own, I have noticed that tilt tends to be the most recalcitrant part of people’s games. When someone is a complete tiltmonkey, it is usually obvious, even for them. And those people, if they hit their bottom or get the wind knocked out of them enough times, will often seek help. They know that they are tiltmonkeys. But for most people, tilt is like a sleeping bear that lives in their mental cave—they never know when it will wake up and bite them again. But because it is usually asleep, most of the time they feel like tilt is not really a significant problem. In a way, most players would be lucky if instead of only tilting in small, intermittent episodes, they tilted continuously, only a little bit, all the time—they would be forced to be more aware of their emotional weaknesses.

Ultimately, if your tilt problems are very serious, and are causing major negative effects on the rest of your life, then I recommend consulting a psychologist or licensed therapist. Although a poker mental coach can help you to understand your motivations, your tilt profile, and help you to work through tilt and develop better habits—it is a short stumble from a tilt problem to a gambling problem. When in doubt, you should consult a licensed professional.

V
Downswings are inevitable in poker. As successful as you think the greatest players are, part of what makes them great is that they have braved downswings harder and deeper than anyone else. It is a statistical reality that the longer you play poker, the more likely it is you will face a downswing of such titanic proportions.

We are naturally inclined to think of ourselves as poker players in terms of how we are when things are going well, and we are successful. But how you face those downswings is just as big, if not a bigger part, of your true capability as a poker player. How you face your downswings is a vital part of your skill.

I emphasize this, because it’s such a direly important point. Being a great poker player isn’t just about grinding past the downswings and focusing on the upswings and the nice graphs and taking shots and moving up. A huge part of the journey of a poker player is how you brave your downswings. It is gritting your teeth, and taking punishment, again and again, day after day, and holding fast. Being a good player when you’re winning is not enough.

It is always possible that a storm of variance will hit you—a storm so large, so powerful, and so destructive that you will not survive it—so destructive that it will break you. And someday, if you keep playing poker, you will face a downswing bigger, deeper, and longer than you ever thought possible. This is a statistical reality. No amount of playing good, or praying, or good karma will protect you from it. It is only a matter of chance. The question, then, is what is your threshold? How big of a storm are you capable of weathering?

There are scores of players who were fantastically skilled when their ships were sailing out in the open waters of running-good. But they could not handle the storm that hit them, and went broke. It is the oldest story in poker, and though it happens again and again, this story always goes untold, unremembered. Narratives in poker revolve around the successful, the upward spiking graphs and the smooth, continuous winrates. The masses of poker seek these stories out, they selectively inundate themselves with these stories, as though to blanket themselves from the harsher reality.

But this is the way it is. Poker is a fickle mistress.

So let us say this: skill and winrate in poker is not measured merely by how good you are when you are running well, but also by how good you are when you are running poorly. That is simply part of your overall winrate, when abstracted over the long run. So if you look at a sample of your winrate while you’re playing well and running well—that winrate isn’t your true winrate, because it’s skewed positively.

When you are downswinging, you will always play worse. How much worse?—that depends on your emotional skills in being able to brave downswings. So we must ask the more pressing question. What tools do we have to handle our downswings? How can we strengthen those emotional skills?

Imagine your worst downswing. Take a moment and try to remember. Think about the weeks, or months that it dragged on. Losing day after day. Constantly having to lower your sense of progress—you’d lose one day, hoping to recuperate it the next—but you’d only lose more, and more the next day, on and on. The feeling that maybe you weren’t good anymore, that you had been wrong all along, or maybe you lost the skill you once had, or maybe everyone else got better. The feeling that poker was punishing you, a feeling of overwhelming, indiscriminate injustice. But worst of all, the feeling that you were moving backwards. That you were no longer climbing the mountain. That you were beginning a slow and indefinite descent downward, and that things might never turn around.

All of these feelings create a feedback loop. Because you are running bad, you lose confidence, you believe you’re never going to win again, you play worse and tilt more, which all makes it more likely that you’re going to continue to lose. Thus, the cycle self-perpetuates, feeding itself, like a snake eating its own tail. I call this phenomenon Poker Hell. Once you descend into this cycle of losing, tilting, and more losing, how do you ever break out of it? Obviously, one has to run good—but because you’re in Poker Hell, you’re inherently going to play worse, and your winrate is going to be depressed. Thus, you would have to run better than you would otherwise, since any positive variance is tapered due to these negative effects. So the better question is this: how do we climb out of Poker Hell, so we can hit the escape velocity out of our downswings more easily?

To answer that question, let’s pull back and more closely analyze the actual mental processes in downswinging. There are two major types of negative effects caused by downswings: the first type is short-term negative associations, and the second is disruptions in one’s self-narrative.

First, we will look at short-term negative associations. Let’s begin with the obvious. A downswing is a stretch of time over which you are repeatedly given negative feedback, regardless of what you do. Because a downswing is a deviation from perfectly calibrated feedback (that is, rewarding correct behavior and punishing bad behavior), the natural effect is that a downswing is going to miscalibrate your senses. You are going to learn—at least in the short term—certain things that are simply incorrect, but which have been impressed upon you by repeated reinforcement.

For example, a common thing that people learn while they’re downswinging is that “he always has the nuts against me,” or that “I never win with [x] hand or in [y] situation,” or even more obtuse claims like “I never win flips.” Of course, to a non-downswinger, a lot of these claims sound silly. But to the downswinger, these claims are actually the product of his conditioning. He has learned these things by the feedback that poker is giving him, through simple trial and error. And, in a sense, such a thought is not stupid—it is simply what his unconscious mind, which is constantly receiving and integrating information, has learned in the short-term.

Because the unconscious mind adapts quickly to new information and changing dynamics, the player “feels” many things are true that a non-downswinger knows are not true about poker in and of itself. And as you may have experienced, even if his rational mind knows that objectively it’s not true that he never wins flips, he still cannot resist his unconscious premonition. He can’t help but feel like he’s going to lose every flip. It looms over him, and affects his behavior, as well as his emotional responses.

The sorts of behaviors that are engendered by downswings are, for the most part, risk-averse. Downswingers tend to stop making high-variance bluffs, they stop being as creative or experimental, they prefer low risk-reward situations to high ones, and they try to prevent from getting into situations where they can make mistakes.

In animal psychology, there is a similar concept known as “learned helplessness.” If you take an animal and place it on an electrified mat that delivers electric shocks at purely random times, from which the animal cannot escape, the animal essentially undergoes a depression. Once it realizes that there is nothing it can do to change its fate, it hunkers down, stops expending energy, and simply accepts the pain that it’s going to receive. It has learned that it is helpless, and therefore not to expend energy or to take risks.

In a downswing, you experience very much the same thing. Because your unconscious mind has learned that “nothing works,” you stop trying to make plays or take risks, and simply hope to wait it out until the good side of variance arrives. Exerting dominance over your opponent is integral to good poker, but it is the first thing to go out the window in a downswing.

So we understand the problem. What can we do to circumvent this?

To some extent, this phenomenon is intractable. You cannot prevent your unconscious mind from learning from short-term patterns—it is too absorbent for that. The mental distortions that are caused by long fluctuations in variance are thus inevitable, and no functioning human brain can escape them. Downswings and their negative effects are simply part of our lot as poker players. But there are a few things we can do to mitigate these effects.

First, win. This sounds simplistic, but it’s profoundly important. Once you start winning, your unconscious mind will unlearn its distorted negative associations. Of course, that’s the catch-22, isn’t it? If you’re downswinging, you have no control over whether or not you win. But there are a few things you can do to give your winrate an extra nudge forward, re-assert a feeling of control and mastery (which will retrain your unconscious mind to start taking more risks and play more masterfully), and get yourself back to winning.

For one, you can move down—even if you don’t need to for bankroll management. I would recommend even moving way down. If you’re playing $2/$4 and going through a brutal downswing, a week of playing $.50/$1.00 would likely do you a lot of good—it will make it much more likely that you win, feel a sense of control and mastery over your opponents, and thus it will straighten out a lot of your negative mental distortions.

Secondly, you must force yourself to start taking more creative risks, in order to re-sensitize yourself to a wider range of possible behaviors. A downswing is naturally going to clip your wings when it comes to creativity, because your creativity is being consistently punished. Especially when you’re playing lower, since it’ll be easier with smaller amounts of money to make creative plays, forcing yourself to take such risks is going to undo that short-term conditioning.

A third thing you can do is game select harder. Again, this seems obvious, but it also will have the effect of nudging your average winrate higher, as well as your sense of mastery and control over weaker opponents.

The fourth third thing you can do is to try to focus on process rather than results. This is a very important idea in poker, which will be reiterated when we talk about learning. If you force yourself to accept punishment and reinforcement on the basis of playing well and making the right decisions rather than on winning pots, this will lessen your susceptibility to mental distortions by downswings. If you are process-oriented, then even if you’re downswinging, what you will care about is whether you make good plays or not, even if you lose those pots. On the other hand, if you’re results oriented, when you are running bad, you are going to continually accept and process the negative feedback from losing pots, even if you’re making the right plays. If you consider your likelihood of making correct plays as a base degree of variance, and the likelihood of your plays working as a higher degree of variance, then if you’re results-oriented, you’re resigning yourself to accept more variance in your self-reinforcement, meaning you will also have more “mental downswings,” or mental distortions.

Consider an EV graph, in which your winnings and all-in EV lines deviate substantially from each other. Of course, it would be nice if your winnings line were glued to your all-in EV line. Mental feedback works the same way. Your mental feedback has its own winnings vs. all-in EV line, but we would call winnings “results,” which has more variance, and all-in EV “process,” or “making the right plays,” which has less variance. So if you could only make your mind interpret whether or not you made good plays, rather than their results, then you’d greatly dampen the effects of a downswing—though, as I said before, it’s impossible to fully stamp them out.

So those are the short-term effects that we feel from downswings. The second major aspect of how we are affected by downswings is disruptions in self-narrative.

Self-narrative is a very important idea in the psychology of identity. According to some theories of self, the way that we make sense of who we are as individuals is through constructing our personal narratives. That is, even when we change in dramatic ways or undergo shifts in consciousness, what unifies our sense of who we are is the narrative thread that winds through all of our life. We carry this narrative continuously through our memory, changing it bit by bit as time progresses. This is how we make sense of who we are—through the stories we construct about ourselves.

As a poker player, your identity is to some extent tied to your success in poker. Poker is what you do; it might be your calling, your craft, or your passion. So when you succeed at it, you are validated, and when you fail at it you are failing yourself—at least, this is the underlying unconscious emotion for many.

So during a downswing, your self-narrative becomes disrupted. Up until now, poker has been the story of your continuous ascent—you started off with nothing, not knowing even the rules of the game, and now here you are, half-way up the mountain. Not a week of playing poker has gone by without you learning, improving, changing. But a downswing is a reversal in that narrative. In a downswing, suddenly you feel like you are going backwards. Like you are losing progress. Your self-narrative, instead of one of growth and ascent, becomes one of stagnation and degradation.

That self-narrative affects you deeply! It’s not simply what you think about when you passively reflect upon your life. Your self-narrative is what you feel like your life is doing. It’s your sense of tomorrow when lying in bed at night. It’s your internal compass of purpose and growth.

In a downswing, it feels as though you are going downward. Of course, you are, in a literal sense. But for most good players, downswings are aberrations from their true winrates. They should be winning, but that fails to assuage them. They just feel the down-ness of the downswing. This prevents them from an overall feeling of optimism about poker, and more importantly, they lose a sense of personal well-being, of motivation, and so on. This affects their monetary EV, but also much more importantly, affects their happiness.

So how can we defy this effect?

Here, we have to utilize the power of mental frames. A mental frame is a perspective, or interpretation from which to view reality. We’re going to analyze frames in a lot more detail in the following section, but for now we will consider the stereotypical, well-worn example, taking a glass of water: one can see a glass as being half-full or half-empty, depending on how you choose to interpret it. A simple shift in mental frame makes all the difference in how one perceives and feels toward the glass of water.

In the same way, self-narratives, being stories, rely tremendously on mental frames. Generally a downswing is going to create the mental frame of “nothing is going right; I am getting punished when I should be rewarded; I don’t deserve this; I am going downhill; I’m losing money,” and so on. Generally, a downswinger tends to feel entitlement, victimization, and that they are in decline.

But let’s try to reverse these perspectives, solely using mental frames. That is, let us take the exact same set of facts, but interpret and contextualize them differently—more advantageously. Let’s say that instead of thinking “I am getting punished when I should be rewarded”—the entitlement frame—we replace it with “how I brave this downswing defines me as a poker player”—which is instead, a challenge frame. Then instead of “I don’t deserve this,” the victimization frame, we replace it with “everyone has downswings; this one is mine; I knew it was coming eventually, and now it’s simply here”—an acceptance frame. Closely related to the acceptance frame is the progress frame: instead of “I am going downhill,” we think “I am making progress through this downswing.”

I call this last notion the fog of variance. One of the fundamental reasons why downswings are so difficult is because we believe we are the only person getting punished unfairly. No matter what good we do or how well we play, when we’re downswinging, poker seems to punish us and only us. There are two ideas in poker regarding variance—the first, that we create our own graphs, but the second, that we are also victims to variance’s whims. People tend to vacillate between these two ideas, never really choosing one clearly (and probably the truth is somewhere in between). But the most fruitful answer is to fully take on both.

Instead of imagining that poker is a monolithic entity that treats one person fairly and another person unfairly—some murky, mindless god of variance—it is valuable instead to isolate poker for each person. If you are facing a downswing, instead of thinking “that’s not fair that poker chose me to face this downswing,” instead take on the frame that “this downswing was inevitable. This downswing is part of my mountain. Eventually I would have to face a downswing of this exact proportion and length; it happens to be right now.” It is like climbing up a mountain and finding an upcoming portion that is going to be especially tricky and time-consuming. Does a mountaineer curse and say “I don’t deserve this part of the mountain; this is unfair that the mountain did this to me”? Of course not. To a mountaineer, that is simply part of the mountain. It makes no sense to talk about climbing a mountain if you are going to complain about it having difficult parts.

But why does poker feel different? It feels different, because in some part of our mind, we imagine that we don’t have to have downswings. Things could be different. Variance could simply “choose” to be kind to us.

And there is, in fact, some truth to that! But nevertheless, that perspective, that mental frame, is extremely deleterious. We must instead choose the fog of variance frame. We must imagine that, in fact, our graph of variance has already been written for us. There is no moment-to-moment re-deciding, re-shuffling, but instead the variance that is going to hit us is like a mountain that we have already begun to climb. We cannot see the variance that is going to hit us—it is obscured by a layer of fog when we look up. But nevertheless, we must know (or pretend) that it is going to be there, that it is simply part of what it means to play poker, and therefore that we inherently accept it the moment we choose to play.

 Then there’s the last frame, the frame of monetary decline—“I’m losing money.” A stubborn downswinger might interject at this point in our discussion, “how could I re-frame that? If I’m losing, I’m losing, that’s just a fact. I can’t delude myself on that point.”

But think for a second how we delineate downswings. If a winning player loses over a week, he’ll announce “I’m having a week-long downswing.” What this really means is that he has defined his local self-narrative as restricted to what’s going on in this week, during which he’s been losing. Thus, he has defined his self-story as starting within the period of this “downswing.” But let’s imagine he’s won the previous three weeks. Why do we accept that he’s having a week-long downswing? Why don’t we say that he’s breaking even over two weeks? Or on a three-week, or four-week upswing? It’s completely arbitrary where we draw the starting point of our current self-narrative. This is true even drawn over a month, or two months, and so on.

So if your lifetime career graph has been going up, and for the last month it has been going down—why are you deciding that you are on a downswing? Why not instead choose to reframe as that for the last four months, you have been winning? Or, hell, that since the beginning of your career, you have been killing it?

So the final and most powerful mental reframe is what I like to call “it’s all one long session.” Because it’s completely arbitrary where we begin or end what we call our downswing (that is, our local self-narratives), we can choose to draw those lines anywhere—then let’s choose at the beginning and ends of our careers. So every session you play, you’re not entering into any new upswings or downswings; there are no special episodes dividing up your experience. You are simply in the same continuous stream with which you began, which is your entire poker career. And so you do not need to take responsibility for individual days, or weeks, or months being bad or good. You do not need to experience all of that as individual episodes in your story. Instead, accept the entire story, from beginning to end, all the time.

It sounds nice, right? But it’s easier said than done. Can you actually identify with your entire poker career? Can you actually sit there after a losing session, and think to yourself “well, my lifetime career has gone pretty well”? Clearly, it’s not easy. But this reframe is a skill that can be learned, given honest and deliberate practice.

In the end, everyone at a poker table is fighting for something. Some are fighting for money, some are fighting for fun, some are fighting for self-respect—there are many motivations that drive a poker table. But what is a person who is on monkey tilt fighting for? What is it that he most wants?

Money? Not really, no. When a tilter is on furious tilt, he is generally in the worst possible position to make money—and many times, he moves up to higher stakes, and plays people against whom he knows he’s not a favorite. Let’s say that there’s an 80% chance that he loses a lot, and a 20% chance that he gets even. If we assume that he knows what he’s doing, and is acting according to his incentives—what is it that he really wants?

What he wants is precisely this. He wants to alter his self-narrative. He wants to escape the story he’s living. Once this player hits his downswing, the entire episode will feel to him like one continuously painful event. On the 20% chance that he gets even on the day, he can escape that pain, obviously—but even on the 80% chance that he loses a great deal of money, he will lose so much that he’s no longer in the same situation monetarily, and therefore will reset his narrative.

Have you ever lost so much money that you felt like you were in a new place? That everything changed? That suddenly, you had to re-take stock of yourself and start over?

This is resetting your narrative. It is pushing so hard through the other side that you feel, perverted as it seems, almost… refreshed. It is forcefully creating a new chapter in your personal narrative. It is, in a strange way, a relief. You no longer have to associate with the decline you were feeling before—everything has started over. It’s like throwing out your old wardrobe, or moving into a new apartment, or making a list of New Year’s resolutions. It’s an arbitrary place that makes you feel like everything’s brand new, and pristine. But here’s the point—no matter how arbitrary and artificial it is on its face, you fully experience that difference! You truly feel released from your story. By monkey tilting in this way, you ensure that you will experience a mental reframe. The only problem is, from a second-order perspective, it’s not a good way to go about doing this, since it sabotages our long-term goals. Rather than sacrifice a lot of money to reset our narrative, we’d much rather try to impose our own mental reframes.

Since mental narratives are how we make sense of ourselves, mental reframes are, essentially, rewritings of our stories. We’ve seen many of these stories that are advantageous to adopt—but how does one adopt a new story? Simple. By telling it over and over again. This is how that narratives function. Why did the ancient Greeks believe in stories of Zeus and Apollo, never having seen any evidence for them? They believed it because of the power of the storytellers themselves. Stories gain their power by being told, again and again. With enough sincere tellings, the story itself becomes more and more convincing, to the point at which one must suspend one’s natural disbelief.

So consider the stories you keep telling yourself. They may not be obvious, but if you turn them over in the light, you will reveal them to yourself. Examine these stories, and consider how you can revise them to better frame your mental life. And therein, with practice, you can rewrite the lived experience of your journey.

VI